PART 1: INTRODUCTION

Serial killers, child predators, Nazi War Criminals. Most people do not consider these as ordinary criminals. They are felons, or demons. They’re the worst of the worst. They’re human monsters. But what exactly makes a person a human monster? Is it just their crimes, or is it more than that. And what precisely is it about these types of crimes that makes us scorn these people?

Despite our detestation, we are obsessed with monsters. Think of all the TV shows that revolve around these types. Criminal Minds, CSI, NCIS. By the time I finish listing all of them, a new one will have premiered. Crime makes for a great narrative, and, like any good story, Crime has a satisfying ending. The perfect conclusion: the courtroom, which most of the time is a narrative of its own.

To understand how Human Monsters are treated by the court, we have to understand how we got to where we are today. 

PART 2: PRE-1800s (Maybe change name for more aura)

	Meet Gilles de Rais. Once a war hero, he had since been disgraced by King Charles VII, though this was not what qualified de Rais as a Human Monster. Rather, it was his post career child murders that may have qualified him as such. Between the years 1433 and 1440, de Rais was suspected of abducting and killing several children in order to use their blood in some sort of ritual.
	So what exactly made Gille de Rais a monster? While the most obvious answer would be the child murders, I would argue that that was not the full scope of de Rais’s monstrosity. Much of human history has been characterized by violence. Violence was used not only to solve major international conflicts, but also smaller interpersonal ones. Death and violence used to not be as big of a deal. People used to die of, at the time, unknown and unexplainable illnesses. Or, someone could go missing and never be seen again as humans did not have the technology to track someone over long distances like we do now.
	What was a big deal, though, was witchcraft. Consider the dynamics of the time. The church was bigger than the state. The church even chose monarchs, and in many ways the church was the government. It wasn’t until de Rais was suspected of demon summoning that he got caught. In the eyes of the church, essentially the government at the time, de Rais was a Human Monster for his witchcraft.
	This isn’t to downplay the element of murder in making de Rais a Monster. Murderers were still condemned in the 15th century. However, there is a nuance here that makes his crime especially bad. Gilles de Rais targeted children. Harming children has always been considered especially heinous, but why? Well, children are often viewed as both innocent and defenseless. In combat, it is less honorable to attack someone who cannot defend themselves, and I think this extends to crime. As for the factor of innocence, it stems from an idea that attacking someone who has done some wrong can be somewhat justified, but attacking someone who has not cannot be justified. The theme of attacking the innocent or defenseless making someone a monster is a theme that shows up all throughout history, and this is one of the most notable examples.
	
	The trial of Gilles de Rais was well documented, or at least as well documented as private secular trials got in the 1400s. In fact, Gilles de Rais actually faced two trials, one secular and one inquisitorial. This was common at the time for especially important trials or ones involving heinous crimes. Though, “trial” may not be extremely accurate in modern terms, as de Rais himself was not involved in much of it. Rather, most of the investigation and trial was done in his absence, and it was only after a confession forced under duress that Gilles de Rais was given the chance to speak in front of the court. 
Though, he “chose not to speak or object against anything” (181). Maybe this was a silent admission of guilt or perhaps de Rais simply knew an objection was futile. Either way, Gilles de Rais’s trial certainly wasn’t fair by modern standards. He wasn’t given a lawyer, allowed to be present or object during witness testimony and during evidence presentation, and of course, was threatened into a confession in the first place.

	The middle ages were somewhat of a wild west for legal justice. Trials tended to be much like Gilles de Rais, where the accused is offered very few rights and opportunities to defend themselves, especially ones that involved religious infractions. This makes it essentially impossible to compare de Rais’s to those of “Non-Monsters”, as there wasn’t really a trial to begin with. This would change though, starting somewhat around the time of 

PART 3: 1800s-Modern

	Adolf Hitler. Many consider him to be the most evil man of all time. Of course, Hitler never made it to trial, but many of his subordinates did. The man in question today is Adolf Eichmann. Eichmann was a key figure in facilitating the holocaust, a crime that hardly needs any more explanation. He was a new type of monster. Throughout most of history, Human Monsters acted on their own or within small groups in an effort to hide their crimes, yet Eichmann was different. Eichmann’s evil was state sponsored. He was able to act with impunity within Nazi Germany and its occupied territories. 
	What makes Eichmann a monster is more than simply being involved with the holocaust. Rather, it was his refusal to act against it. This raises a significant moral question. It is widely accepted that people have a moral obligation to not facilitate evil, but do they have a moral obligation to act against it when given the chance? If a person witnesses a crime, do they have to report it? Most modern legal systems say no, but the law doesn’t always align with morality. The debate surrounding these questions is outside the scope of this essay, but how society has answered these are relevant. The answer is yes. 
	Most of Nazi leadership used the same defense when brought to trial, most famously during the Nuremberg trials. Their defense was that they were just following orders, as all military members are expected to do. On top of that, they asserted that they could not just quit their position, as they would not be permitted to do so. This was the dilemma that the Nazi’s painted for the courtroom. Adolf Eichmann would attempt the same defense during his trial in Jerusalem in 1960. It did not work, here’s why.
	The Israeli court argued that “justice grounded in the depths of every man is presented solely as a substitute for familiarity with the law. Its plausibility rests on the assumption that the law expresses only what every man’s conscience would tell him anyhow” (293). The court essentially argues here that the law is not a substitute for morality, and that every man should follow morality over the law. This is compounded by the fact that Eichmann was much more than a bystander, as presented in our original moral question. This purposeful deviation from moral code is why Eichmann is considered a Human Monster. 
	This designation would make an impact on Eichmann’s trial, too. Unlike most other Nazis, Eichmann was tried in Jerusalem by an Israeli court. This is strange, considering Eichmann was not an Israeli citizen nor had been in Israel likely ever in his life before the trial. In fact, he was kidnapped from his home in Argentina to face trial. This state sponsored abduction caused some international outrage and raised some questions about the credibility of the trial. For one, an Israeli court has no right to try someone who was captured illegally. Additionally, how can a court try someone for breaking crimes which were committed before Israel was even a state? Not only that, but the statute of limitations had expired on a many number of crimes that Eichmann was eventually convicted of. The defense also objected to the fact that the judges were jewish, giving them an obvious conflict of interest. On top of all this, the trial proceedings themselves were flawed, as the defense was not permitted to present witnesses (274). 
	There is no doubt that the deck was stacked against Eichmann. For an ordinary citizen, these defenses by technicalities would have worked, yet for Eichmann they did not. Adolf Eichmann’s status as a Human Monster resulted in specially biased courtroom treatment and directly led to his conviction.
	
	Just 36 years prior, a similar phenomenon occurred. Nathan Leopold and Richard Loeb, commonly referred to as Leopold and Loeb, were convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment plus 99 years. While first degree murder has always carried a harsh penalty, this was an unusually large sentence for the pair. This was partially due to the fact that it was widely believed that the two would receive the death sentence, and it took an 8 hour speech by famous defense lawyer Clarence Darrow to persuade the court against it. I would assert that this harsh treatment was a result of the two being viewed as human monsters.
	So what made Leopold and Loeb monsters? Part of it can be traced back to a theme previously discussed. The pair targeted a child. The victim was a fourteen year old boy who by all accounts was a perfectly normal child. There is no justification for killing someone innocent and defenseless. Someone who had their whole life in front of them. This certainly played a role in making Leopold and Loeb monsters, but it doesn't tell the entire story.
	The main factor in making Leopold and Loeb monsters was the complete lack of motive for their crime. First degree murder is separated by the fact that the murder was premeditated. By definition, this means that first degree murders have some type of motive, typically revenge of some sort. In most cases, the perpetrators have some type of reason to be upset with the victim, but that was not true for Leopold and Loeb. Their motive was only to prove that they were too smart for the law. They had no reason to be upset with the victim, Bobby Franks.
	To add a cherry on top, the pair enjoyed the attention their crime brought to them. Prior to being caught, they were reported to have been talking about the murder with family and friends, which can almost be interpreted as them taking a premature victory lap. Though it didn’t stop when they were caught, as Loeb was quoted “I enjoyed being looked at through the bars, because I was a famous criminal” (Week 10 Lecture). 
	These were the traits that made Leopold and Loeb Human Monsters in the eyes of the court, and the public, resulting in their especially harsh treatment when it came time for sentencing.

PART 4: MODERN DAY

	The modern age has seen a lot of Human Monsters, many like the ones previously discussed. However, one of the newest forms of monsters are modern day terrorists. The most famous of these terrorist attacks is 9/11.
	9/11 was a new type of Human Monster incident, per say. It took the lives of almost three thousand and injured thousands more, making a monster out of the whole organization behind. This is new, though. The group behind 9/11 was Al-Qaeda. Unlike in Eichmann’s case in Nazi Germany, Al-Qaeda was not a state, rather it was a militant organization who used terrorism to advance their political and religious goals.
	So what made Al-Qaeda a group of monsters? We can draw back to themes discussed previously. For one, the world trade center was full of innocent people. Importantly, these people had no connection with Al-Qaeda prior to 9/11. Attacking innocent people has always made a monster.
	What is more interesting though, is Al-Qaeda’s motive. One of the major stated goals of the group is to implement sharia law. While there surely are some supporters of this goal, the United States and most of the world as a whole opposes this idea, underlining the law system’s sexist and anti-progressive ideals. Lacking a sympathizable motive, along with tactics that harm innocent people, it’s no wonder that Al-Qaeda isn’t considered just a rebellion group, it's a terrorist group.

	How did this status as a terrorist organization affect Al-Qaeda members in the courtroom? Well, it is important to note that the United States didn’t have jurisdiction over the areas where Al-Qaeda members resided, though a good number of them were extradited to the US through international cooperation. These members were sent to Guantanamo bay where they were held in detention indefinitely. The United States decided to essentially skip the court process and get straight to the point, the US wanted information from these members and would do anything to get it, including torture. Inmates of Guantanamo bay were allegedly subjected to torture, such as being forced to listen to extremely loud heavy metal music for extended periods of time, and much worse (Week 15 Lecture). It was only after the US had extracted all usefulness from a detainee that they were allowed to see their day in court.
	Guantanamo bay prisoners were undoubtedly treated far harsher than ordinary criminals due to their perceived status as human monsters. Their treatment was completely unlawful and a violation of their human rights, yet nothing was done about this because, well, in the eyes of the government, it's hard to have sympathy for a Human Monster.


PART 5: Changes over time

	This leaves us with just a few questions left to answer. How has our definition of Human Monster changed over time, and how have we treated them differently over the years? Let's start with the first one. Pre-1900s, there was an emphasis on witchcraft and other types of supposed demonic practices. These were the types of crimes that caused the church to get involved, where we can really see how the accused for witchcraft were treated differently. As another example, you can look to the Salem witch trials for how these alleged witches were treated differently.
	However, as enlightenment ideas started being implemented into governments and separation of church and state became common, witchcraft became less of a concern. In the eyes of the public, those accused of witchcraft went from a major threat, to just crazy people to pay no attention to. It was around this time that courts became somewhat close to what we know them to be today, too. As we can see with Eichmann and the Nuremberg Trials, Courts faced a major dilemma in deciding whether someone following orders was a Human Monster, as they ruled that they generally were.
	Finally, in the modern day, the definition of Human Monster has evolved further. We now see groups that are dedicated to using terrorism to achieve their goals. In addition, while not previously discussed, the modern age also sees cyber terrorists, and mass shooters.
	A lot of things have stayed the same, though. While a Human Monster looks a lot different than it did back in the 1400s, there are some fundamental similarities that stretch across time. For one, Human Monsters often victimize innocent or defenseless people. Additionally, Human Monsters often have motives that are entirely un-sympathizable, and out of the ordinary for regular murderers. 

	We can now move on to discussing how Human Monsters are treated differently over time. Certainly, those perceived to be Human Monsters have always received unique treatment, but the only constant among that is this unique treatment is always harsher than that of an ordinary criminal. We can look at Gilles de Rais and the Medieval times, where Human Monsters were often subjected to torture to get a confession, and were not really given a chance to defend themselves. Doesn’t that sound familiar? Well, yes, this type of treatment is still practiced today in Guantanamo bay where prisoners are tortured for information before ever seeing the courtroom. Despite all the advancements civilization has made for the rights of the accused, this type of deplorable treatment is still used hundreds of years later. 
	Let’s take a step back for one second, though, into the twentieth century. Adolf Eichmann had a very notable case, where his defense by legal technicality was completely overlooked due to his status as a Human Monster. There are many notable cases throughout history where an obviously guilty criminal gets off free because the prosecution is not carried through lawfully, it's even why we have Miranda rights, but this defense was afforded to Eichmann.
	One constant throughout time has always been the extremely harsh sentencing of Human Monsters, even proportional to their crime. Look no further than Leopold and Loeb who were given life plus 99 years, lucky to escape the death sentence, for just one charge of first degree murder. 

PART 6: CONCLUSION/REFLECTION

	This analysis has directly led me to some tough moral questions. The most obvious being, is it right to treat someone differently if they are perceived to be a Human Monster? Should Human Monsters receive harsher punishments relative to their crimes than ordinary criminals? These are exceedingly difficult questions to answer, ones that probably warrant an entire presentation on their own.
	What is certain, though, is that what we consider a Human Monster has changed so much throughout history, many times as an outcome of evolving technology. A terrorist group would never have been able to attack a nation halfway around the globe back in Gilles de Rais’s time, for example. It’ll be interesting, and most likely horrifying, to see how people take advantage of technology in the future to once again re-define what a Human Monster is. Thank you.
